[TEXT]
Discovered in the early 1800s and named ‘nicotianine’, the oily essence nowcalled nicotine is the main active ingredient of tobacco.
Nicotine, however, isonly a small component of cigarette smoke, which contains more than 4,700chemical compounds, including 43 cancer-causing substances.
In recent times,scientific research has been providing evidence that years of cigarette smokingvastly increases the risk of developing fatal medical conditions.
In addition to being responsible for more than 85 per cent of lung cancers,smoking is associated with cancers of, amongst others, the mouth, stomach andkidneys, and is thought to cause about 14 per cent of leukemia and cervicalcancers.
In 1990, smoking caused more than 84,000 deaths, mainly resultingfrom such problems as pneumonia, bronchitis and influenza.
Smoking, it isbelieved, is responsible for 30 per cent of all deaths from cancer and clearlyrepresents the most important preventable cause of cancer in countries like theUnited States today.
Passive smoking, the breathing in of the side-stream smoke from the burning oftobacco between puffs or of the smoke exhaled by a smoker, also causes a serioushealth risk.
A report published in 1992 by the US Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA) emphasized the health dangers, especially from side-streamsmoke.
This type of smoke contains more smaller particles and is therefore morelikely to be deposited deep in the lungs.
On the basis of this report, the EPA hasclassified environmental tobacco smoke in the highest risk category for causingcancer.
As an illustration of the health risks, in the case of a married couple where onepartner is a smoker and one a non-smoker, the latter is believed to have a 30 percent higher risk of death from heart disease because of passive smoking.
Therisk of lung cancer also increases over the years of exposure and the figure jumpsto 80 per cent if the spouse has been smoking four packs a day for 20 years.
Ithas been calculated that 17 per cent of cases of lung cancer can be attributed tohigh levels of exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke during childhood andadolescence.

[TEXT]
A more recent study by researchers at the University of California at SanFrancisco (UCSF) has shown that second-hand cigarette smoke does more harmto non-smokers than to smokers.
Leaving aside the philosophical question ofwhether anyone should have to breathe someone else’s cigarette smoke, thereport suggests that the smoke experienced by many people in their daily lives isenough to produce substantial adverse effects on a person’s heart and lungs.
The report, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (AMA),was based on the researchers’ own earlier research but also includes a review ofstudies over the past few years.
The American Medical Association representsabout half of all US doctors and is a strong opponent of smoking.
The studysuggests that people who smoke cigarettes are continually damaging theircardiovascular system, which adapts in order to compensate for the effects ofsmoking.
It further states that people who do not smoke do not have the benefitof their system adapting to the smoke inhalation.
Consequently, the effects ofpassive smoking are far greater on non-smokers than on smokers.
This report emphasizes that cancer is not caused by a single element in cigarettesmoke; harmful effects to health are caused by many components.
Carbonmonoxide, for example, competes with oxygen in red blood cells and interfereswith the blood’s ability to deliver life-giving oxygen to the heart.
Nicotine andother toxins in cigarette smoke activate small blood cells called platelets, whichincreases the likelihood of blood clots, thereby affecting blood circulationthroughout the body.
The researchers criticize the practice of some scientific consultants who workwith the tobacco industry for assuming that cigarette smoke has the sameimpact on smokers as it does on non-smokers.
They argue that those scientistsare underestimating the damage done by passive smoking and, in support oftheir recent findings, cite some previous research which points to passivesmoking as the cause for between 30,000 and 60,000 deaths from heart attackseach year in the United States.
This means that passive smoking is the thirdmost preventable cause of death after active smoking and alcohol-relateddiseasesThe study argues that the type of action needed against passive smoking shouldbe similar to that being taken against illegal drugs and AIDS (SIDA).

[TEXT]
The UCSFresearchers maintain that the simplest and most cost-effective action is toestablish smoke-free work places, schools and public places.
A In recent years we have all been exposed to dire media reports concerning theimpending demise of global coal and oil reserves, but the depletion of another key nonrenewable resource continues without receiving much press at all.
Helium – an inert,odourless, monatomic element known to lay people as the substance that makesballoons float and voices squeak when inhaled – could be gone from this planet within ageneration.
B Helium itself is not rare; there is actually a plentiful supply of it in the cosmos.
Infact, 24 per cent of our galaxy’s elemental mass consists of helium, which makes it thesecond most abundant element in our universe.
Because of its lightness, however, mosthelium vanished from our own planet many years ago.
Consequently, only a minisculeproportion – 0.
00052%, to be exact – remains in earth’s atmosphere.
Helium is the byproduct of millennia of radioactive decay from the elements thorium and uranium.
Thehelium is mostly trapped in subterranean natural gas bunkers and commerciallyextracted through a method known as fractional distillation.
C The loss of helium on Earth would affect society greatly.
Defying the perceptionof it as a novelty substance for parties and gimmicks, the element actually has manyvital applications in society.

[TEXT]
Probably the most well known commercial usage is inairships and blimps (non-flammable helium replaced hydrogen as the lifting gas du jourafter the Hindenburg catastrophe in 1932, during which an airship burst into flames andcrashed to the ground killing some passengers and crew).
But helium is alsoinstrumental in deep-sea diving, where it is blended with nitrogen to mitigate the dangersof inhaling ordinary air under high pressure; as a cleaning agent for rocket engines; and,in its most prevalent use, as a coolant for superconducting magnets in hospital MRI(magnetic resonance imaging) scanners.
D The possibility of losing helium forever poses the threat of a real crisis becauseits unique qualities are extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible to duplicate (certainly, nobiosynthetic ersatz product is close to approaching the point of feasibility for helium,even as similar developments continue apace for oil and coal).
Helium is even cheerfullyderided as a loner” element since it does not adhere to other molecules like its cousin,hydrogen.
According to Dr.
Lee Sobotka, helium is the most noble of gases, meaningit’s very stable and non-reactive for the most part … it has a closed electronicconfiguration, a very tightly bound atom.
It is this coveting of its own electrons thatprevents combination with other elements’.
Another important attribute is helium’sunique boiling point, which is lower than that for any other element.
The worseningglobal shortage could render millions of dollars of high-value, life-saving equipmenttotally useless.
The dwindling supplies have already resulted in the postponement ofresearch and development projects in physics laboratories and manufacturing plantsaround the world.
There is an enormous supply and demand imbalance partly broughtabout by the expansion of high-tech manufacturing in Asia.
E The source of the problem is the Helium Privatisation Act (HPA), an Americanlaw passed in 1996 that requires the U.

[TEXT]
National Helium Reserve to liquidate its heliumassets by 2015 regardless of the market price.
Although intended to settle the originalcost of the reserve by a U.
Congress ignorant of its ramifications, the result of this firesale is that global helium prices are so artificially deflated that few can be botheredrecycling the substance or using it judiciously.
Deflated values also mean that naturalgas extractors see no reason to capture helium.
Much is lost in the process of extraction.
As Sobotka notes: "[t]he government had the good vision to store helium, and thequestion now is: Will the corporations have the vision to capture it when extractingnatural gas, and consumers the wisdom to recycle? This takes long-term vision becausepresent market forces are not sufficient to compel prudent practice”.
For Nobel-prizelaureate Robert Richardson, the U.
government must be prevailed upon to repeal itsprivatisation policy as the country supplies over 80 per cent of global helium, mostly fromthe National Helium Reserve.
For Richardson, a twenty- to fifty-fold increase in priceswould provide incentives to recycle.
F A number of steps need to be taken in order to avert a costly predicament in thecoming decades.
Firstly, all existing supplies of helium ought to be conserved andreleased only by permit, with medical uses receiving precedence over other commercialor recreational demands.
Secondly, conservation should be obligatory and enforced by aregulatory agency.
At the moment some users, such as hospitals, tend to recyclediligently while others, such as NASA, squander massive amounts of helium.
Lastly,research into alternatives to helium must begin in earnest.

