At first, von Frisch thought the bees were responding only to the scent of the food.
But what did the third dance mean? And if bees were responding only to the scent,
how could they also ‘sniff down’ food hundreds of metres away from the hive*, food
which was sometimes downwind? On a hunch, he started gradually moving the
feeding dish further and further away and noticed as he did so that the dances of the
returning scout bees also started changing. If he placed the feeding dish over nine
metres away, the second type of dance, the sickle version, came into play.
But once he moved it past 36 metres, the scouts would then start dancing the third,
quite different, waggle dance.
The measurement of the actual distance too, he concluded, was precise. For
example, a feeding dish 300 metres away was indicated by 15 complete runs
through the pattern in 30 seconds. When the dish was moved to 60 metres away,
the number dropped to eleven.
Von Frisch noted something further. When the scout bees came home to tell their
sisters about the food source, sometimes they would dance outside on the horizontal
entrance platform of the hive, and sometimes on the vertical wall inside. And,
depending on where they danced, the straight portion of the waggle dance would
point in different directions. The outside dance was fairly easy to decode: the straight
portion of the dance pointed directly to the food source, so the bees would merely
have to decode the distance message and fly off in that direction to find their food.
But by studying the dance on the inner wall of the hive, von Frisch discovered a
remarkable method which the dancer used to tell her sisters the direction of the food
in relation to the sun. When inside the hive, the dancer cannot use the sun, so she
uses gravity instead. The direction of the sun is represented by the top of the hive
wall. If she runs straight up, this means that the feeding place is in the same
direction as the sun. However, if, for example, the feeding place is 40º to the left of
the sun, then the dancer would run 40º to the left of the vertical line. This was to be
the first of von Frisch’s remarkable discoveries. Soon he would also discover a
number of other remarkable facts about how bees communicate and, in doing so,
revolutionise the study of animal behaviour generally.

All these activities may have damaging environmental impacts. For example, land clearing
for agriculture is the largest single cause of deforestation; chemical fertilisers and pesticides
may contaminate water supplies; more intensive farming and the abandonment of fallow
periods tend to exacerbate soil erosion; and the spread of monoculture and use of highyielding varieties of crops have been accompanied by the disappearance of old varieties of
food plants which might have provided some insurance against pests or diseases in future.
Soil erosion threatens the productivity of land in both rich and poor countries. The United
States, where the most careful measurements have been done, discovered in 1982 that
about one-fifth of its farmland was losing topsoil at a rate likely to diminish the soil's
productivity. The country subsequently embarked upon a program to convert 11 per cent of
its cropped land to meadow or forest. Topsoil in India and China is vanishing much faster
than in America.
Government policies have frequently compounded the environmental damage that farming
can cause. In the rich countries, subsidies for growing crops and price supports for farm
output drive up the price of land. The annual value of these subsidies is immense: about
$250 billion, or more than all World Bank lending in the 1980s. To increase the output of
crops per acre, a farmer's easiest option is to use more of the most readily available inputs:
fertilisers and pesticides. Fertiliser use doubled in Denmark in the period 1960-1985 and
increased in The Netherlands by 150 per cent. The quantity of pesticides applied has risen
too: by 69 per cent in 1975-1984 in Denmark, for example, with a rise of 115 per cent in the
frequency of application in the three years from 1981.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s some efforts were made to reduce farm subsidies. The
most dramatic example was that of New Zealand, which scrapped most farm support in
1984. A study of the environmental effects, conducted in 1993, found that the end of
fertiliser subsidies had been followed by a fall in fertiliser use (a fall compounded by the
decline in world commodity prices, which cut farm incomes). The removal of subsidies also
stopped land-clearing and over-stocking, which in the past had been the principal causes of
erosion. Farms began to diversify. The one kind of subsidy whose removal appeared to
have been bad for the environment was the subsidy to manage soil erosion.
In less enlightened countries, and in the European Union, the trend has been to reduce
rather than eliminate subsidies, and to introduce new payments to encourage farmers to
treat their land in environmentally friendlier ways, or to leave it fallow. It may sound strange
but such payments need to be higher than the existing incentives for farmers to grow food
crops. Farmers, however, dislike being paid to do nothing. In several countries they have
become interested in the possibility of using fuel produced from crop residues either as a
replacement for petrol (as ethanol) or as fuel for power stations (as biomass). Such fuels
produce far less carbon dioxide than coal or oil, and absorb carbon dioxide as they grow.
They are therefore less likely to contribute to the greenhouse effect. But they are rarely
competitive with fossil fuels unless subsidised - and growing them does no less
environmental harm than other crops.

The role of governments in environmental management is difficult but inescapable. Sometimes,
the state tries to manage the resources it owns, and does so badly. Often, however,
governments act in an even more harmful way. They actually subsidise the exploitation and
consumption of natural resources. A whole range of policies, from farm-price support to
protection for coal-mining, do environmental damage and (often) make no economic sense.
Scrapping them offers a two-fold bonus: a cleaner environment and a more efficient economy.
Growth and environmentalism can actually go hand in hand, if politicians have the courage to
confront the vested interest that subsidies create.
Section B
No activity affects more of the earth's surface than farming. It shapes a third of the planet's land
area, not counting Antarctica, and the proportion is rising. World food output per head has risen
by 4 per cent between the 1970s and 1980s mainly as a result of increases in yields from land
already in cultivation, but also because more land has been brought under the plough. Higher
yields have been achieved by increased irrigation, better crop breeding, and a doubling in the
use of pesticides and chemical fertilisers in the 1970s and 1980s.
Section C
All these activities may have damaging environmental impacts. For example, land clearing for
agriculture is the largest single cause of deforestation; chemical fertilisers and pesticides may
contaminate water supplies; more intensive farming and the abandonment of fallow periods tend
to exacerbate soil erosion; and the spread of monoculture and use of high-yielding varieties of
crops have been accompanied by the disappearance of old varieties of food plants which might
have provided some insurance against pests or diseases in future. Soil erosion threatens the
productivity of land in both rich and poor countries. The United States, where the most careful
measurements have been done, discovered in 1982 that about one-fifth of its farmland was
losing topsoil at a rate likely to diminish the soil's productivity. The country subsequently
embarked upon a program to convert 11 per cent of its cropped land to meadow or forest.
Topsoil in India and China is vanishing much faster than in America.
Section D
Government policies have frequently compounded the environmental damage that farming can
cause. In the rich countries, subsidies for growing crops and price supports for farm output
drive up the price of land. The annual value of these subsidies is immense: about $250 billion,
or more than all World Bank lending in the 1980s. To increase the output of crops per acre, a
farmer's easiest option is to use more of the most readily available inputs: fertilisers and
pesticides. Fertiliser use doubled in Denmark in the period 1960-1985 and increased in The
Netherlands by 150 per cent. The quantity of pesticides applied has risen too: by 69 per cent in
1975-1984 in Denmark, for example, with a rise of 115 per cent in the frequency of application
in the three years from 1981.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s some efforts were made to reduce farm subsidies. The most
dramatic example was that of New Zealand, which scrapped most farm support in 1984. A
study of the environmental effects, conducted in 1993, found that the end of fertiliser subsidies
had been followed by a fall in fertiliser use (a fall compounded by the decline in world
commodity prices, which cut farm incomes). The removal of subsidies also stopped landclearing and over-stocking, which in the past had been the principal causes of erosion. Farms
began to diversify. The one kind of subsidy whose removal appeared to have been bad for the
environment was the subsidy to manage soil erosion.
In less enlightened countries, and in the European Union, the trend has been to reduce rather
than eliminate subsidies, and to introduce new payments to encourage farmers to treat their
land in environmentally friendlier ways, or to leave it fallow. It may sound strange but such
payments need to be higher than the existing incentives for farmers to grow food crops.
Farmers, however, dislike being paid to do nothing. In several countries they have become
interested in the possibility of using fuel produced from crop residues either as a replacement
for petrol (as ethanol) or as fuel for power stations (as biomass). Such fuels produce far less
carbon dioxide than coal or oil, and absorb carbon dioxide as they grow. They are therefore
less likely to contribute to the greenhouse effect. But they are rarely competitive with fossil fuels
unless subsidised - and growing them does no less environmental harm than other crops.
Section E
In poor countries, governments aggravate other sorts of damage. Subsidies for pesticides and
artificial fertilisers encourage farmers to use greater quantities than are needed to get the
highest economic crop yield. A study by the International Rice Research Institute of pesticide
use by farmers in South East Asia found that, with pest-resistant varieties of rice, even
moderate applications of pesticide frequently cost farmers more than they saved. Such waste
puts farmers on a chemical treadmill: bugs and weeds become resistant to poisons, so next
year's poisons must be more lethal. One cost is to human health. Every year some 10,000
people die from pesticide poisoning, almost all of them in the developing countries, and another
400,000 become seriously ill. As for artificial fertilisers, their use world-wide increased by 40 per
cent per unit of farmed land between the mid 1970s and late 1980s, mostly in the developing
countries. Overuse of fertilisers may cause farmers to stop rotating crops or leaving their land
fallow. That, in turn, may make soil erosion worse.
Section F
A result of the Uruguay Round of world trade negotiations is likely to be a reduction of 36 per
cent in the average levels of farm subsidies paid by the rich countries in 1986-1990. Some of
the world's food production will move from Western Europe to regions where subsidies are
lower or non-existent, such as the former communist countries and parts of the developing
world. Some environmentalists worry about this outcome. It will undoubtedly mean more
pressure to convert natural habitat into farmland. But it will also have many desirable
environmental effects. The intensity of farming in the rich world should decline, and the use of
chemical inputs will diminish. Crops are more likely to be grown in the environments to which
they are naturally suited. And more farmers in poor countries will have the money and the
incentive to manage their land in ways that are sustainable in the long run. That is important.
To feed an increasingly hungry world, farmers need every incentive to use their soil and water
effectively and efficiently.

The invention of rockets is linked inextricably with the invention of 'black powder'.
Most historians of technology credit the Chinese with its discovery. They base their
belief on studies of Chinese writings or on the notebooks of early Europeans who
settled in or made long visits to China to study its history and civilisation. It is
probable that, some time in the tenth century, black powder was first compounded
from its basic ingredients of saltpetre, charcoal and sulphur. But this does not mean
that it was immediately used to propel rockets. By the thirteenth century, powderpropelled fire arrows had become rather common. The Chinese relied on this type of
technological development to produce incendiary projectiles of many sorts, explosive
grenades and possibly cannons to repel their enemies. One such weapon was the
'basket of fire' or, as directly translated from Chinese, the 'arrows like flying leopards'.
The 0.7 metre-long arrows, each with a long tube of gunpowder attached near the
point of each arrow, could be fired from a long, octagonal-shaped basket at the same
time and had a range of 400 paces. Another weapon was the 'arrow as a flying
sabre', which could be fired from crossbows. The rocket, placed in a similar position
to other rocket-propelled arrows, was designed to increase the range. A small iron
weight was attached to the 1.5m bamboo shaft, just below the feathers, to increase
the arrow's stability by moving the centre of gravity to a position below the rocket. At
a similar time, the Arabs had developed the 'egg which moves and burns'. This 'egg'
was apparently full of gunpowder and stabilised by a 1.5m tail. It was fired using two
rockets attached to either side of this tail.
It was not until the eighteenth century that Europe became seriously interested in the
possibilities of using the rocket itself as a weapon of war and not just to propel other
weapons. Prior to this, rockets were used only in pyrotechnic displays. The incentive
for the more aggressive use of rockets came not from within the European continent
but from far-away India, whose leaders had built up a corps of rocketeers and used
rockets successfully against the British in the late eighteenth century. The Indian
rockets used against the British were described by a British Captain serving in India
as ‘an iron envelope about 200 millimetres long and 40 millimetres in diameter with
sharp points at the top and a 3m-long bamboo guiding stick’. In the early nineteenth
century the British began to experiment with incendiary barrage rockets. The British
rocket differed from the Indian version in that it was completely encased in a stout,
iron cylinder, terminating in a conical head, measuring one metre in diameter and
having a stick almost five metres long and constructed in such a way that it could be
firmly attached to the body of the rocket. The Americans developed a rocket,
complete with its own launcher, to use against the Mexicans in the mid-nineteenth
century. A long cylindrical tube was propped up by two sticks and fastened to the top
of the launcher, thereby allowing the rockets to be inserted and lit from the other end.
However, the results were sometimes not that impressive as the behaviour of the
rockets in flight was less than predictable.

The Motor Car

A There are now over 700 million motor vehicles in the
world - and the number is rising by more than 40 million
each year. The average distance driven by car users is
growing too - from 8km a day per person in western Europe
in 1965 to 25 km a day in 1995. This dependence on motor
vehicles has given rise to major problems, including
environmental pollution, depletion of oil resources,
traffic congestion and safety.
B While emissions from new cars are far less harmful than
they used to be, city streets and motorways are becoming
more crowded than ever, often with older trucks, buses
and taxis which emit excessive levels of smoke and fumes.
This concentration of vehicles makes air quality in urban
areas unpleasant and sometimes dangerous to breathe.
Even Moscow has joined the list of capitals afflicted by
congestion and traffic fumes. In Mexico City, vehicle
pollution is a major health hazard.
C Until a hundred years ago, most journeys were in the 20km
range, the distance conveniently accessible by horse.
Heavy freight could only be carried by water or rail.
Invention of the motor vehicle brought personal mobility
to the masses and made rapid freight delivery possible
over a much wider area. In the United Kingdom, about 90
per cent of inland freight is carried by road. The world
cannot revert to the horse-drawn wagon. Can it avoid
being locked into congested and polluting ways of
transporting people and goods?
D In Europe most cities are still designed for the old
modes of transport. Adaptation to the motor car has
involved adding ring roads, one-way systems and parking
lots. In the United States, more land is assigned to car
use than to housing. Urban sprawl means that life
without a car is next to impossible. Mass use of motor
vehicles has also killed or injured millions of people.
Other social effects have been blamed on the car such as
alienation and aggressive human behaviour.
E A 1993 study by the European Federation for Transport and
Environment found that car transport is seven times as
costly as rail travel in terms of the external social
costs it entails - congestion, accidents, pollution, loss
of cropland and natural habitats, depletion of oil
resources, and so on. Yet cars easily surpass trains or
buses as a flexible and convenient mode of personal
transport. It is unrealistic to expect people to give up
private cars in favour of mass transit.
